---
title: What Can You Clone?
date: 2019-01-31
author: Henika Patel
tags:
  - Blog
hero: ./images/pic1.png
slug: what-can-you-clone
excerpt:
---
It has been more than two decades since the world freaked over the
cloning of Dolly- the Sheep, followed by Jurrasic Park, terrifying the
audiences with the possibility of bringing back the gigantic carnivores.
The topic, however, eventually petered out and became a distant
possibility. Until now\... The rapid pace of science and technology, the
age of gene editing, synthetic biology and artificial intelligence
finally made the sci-fi, futuristic scenario a reality. And no, its not
about bringing back the T-rexes.

Dr. Hwang Woo-suk, performs numerous C-sections in his clinic and the
newborn is given not a name, but a number -- representing that its a
clone. What's interesting is that the baby isn't a human.

It's a puppy!!

Yes, dogs are being cloned at the Sooam Biotech Research Foundation,
South Korea, the world's first company dedicated to cloning the man's
best friend.

Cloning has always left ethicists more than apprehensive -- it comes at
the cost of pain and suffering. Besides requiring dozen or more embryos
to produce a single healthy dog, the surrogate mothers may be treated
with hormones and drugs, which in the long run, may lead to
miscarriages, increased mortality or deformity of the pups. The first
dog cloning, in 2005, took about 100 borrowed wombs and more than 1000
embryos! It was named Snuppy, amalgam of "Seoul National University" and
"puppy".

Today, the process- Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer- is very fine-tuned:
thanks to years of trial and error. It all begins with poking a
micro-hole in an egg from a donor dog and removing the nucleus (where
DNA is housed). Next, the nucleus is replaced by a cell from the dog to
be cloned (skin or cheek cell). Finally, this hybrid egg is blasted with
short burst of electricity to fuse the cells and initiate cell division.
The embryo is embedded in a surrogate's womb and if everything goes
well, a puppy is born some 60 days later!! Cloning pets is, "like The
Handmaid's Tale," says one ethicist. "It's a canine version of
reproductive machines."

All this fancy stuff makes one wonder, why would people want to clone
their dogs?

The dogs considered to be family members and when they die, its hard for
people who were really close to them. Cloning to these people is an
alternative to a funeral, another way of dealing with death --- the
closest thing to getting back to the lost dog. Having said that, though
the clones look like the original dog, and share some traits, they don't
have the original dog's memories. They are more like identical twins
borns at a later date. A \$100,000 twin out of time perhaps! Cloning has
become a business indeed. If the dog owner provides DNA from a deceased
pet quickly enough -- within five days of its death -- Sooam promises a
speedy replacement. If the cells provided are not compromised, Sooam
guarantees to give back a replica of the dog in 5 months! Expensively
fascinating indeed\...

Reference- http://www.vanityfair.com
