---
title: An Elephantine Project
date: 2018-11-12
author: Nikitha Srinivas
tags:
  - Blog
hero: ./images/pic1.png
slug: elephantine-project
excerpt:
---

FICTION MADE INTO REALITY!

Jurassic park imagined a time in the future where it was possible bring
back the extinct dinosaurs back to life. Now, the geneticists at Harvard
seek to resurrect the prehistoric Woolly Mammoth.

"Woolly" Mammoths?

Roughly the size of the modern African elephants and closely related to
the Asian elephants, these ice age herbivores lived from the Pleistocene
to early Holocene epoch(120000 to 4000 years ago), millions of years
after the dinosaurs met their fate. People also existed during the time
of mammoths(and hence the cave paintings). The current revolution in
genetics which is combating various things like aging , curing and even
cloning your pet dog, may bring back these shaggy animals to life.

The science behind is really cool! First, the team sequences the genome
from the frozen carcasses of this prehistoric mammoth that are brought
up from the ice. Now they know the genome of a mammoth, so they choose
the important characteristics that make a mammoth a mammoth. Since they
are closely related to the Asian elephants , most of their genome is
similar to these current elephant species. Unlike Jurassic park, they
are not cloning these woolly mammoth but instead they aim to synthesize
the genes and place them into the embryo of an Asian elephant. They put
this embryo back into the Asian elephant and (tada!), a baby woolly
mammoth or (is it a Mammophant?) is born. The team is also planning on
synthetic womb though, because Asian elephants are on the endangered
list.

Why bring the dead animals back?

The answer happens to be in Russia. The Siberian plains are vast tract
of lands made of permafrost( basically frozen soil, rock over a very
long period). It has been found that the tundra is a ticking time bomb.
Trapped within the permafrost is more carbon than if we burned the
Earth's forests three times. Due to global warming, the world is getting
closer and closer to the point where the permafrost will melt and boom!
They have discovered that just by re-introducing these large herbivores
the temperature of the permafrost can be decreased by 15 degrees(that is
a lot!!). Wonder how? These now-extinct giants encourage the growth of
steppes grasses, which in turn have a high albedo effect ( the grass
reflects of the sunlight back into the atmosphere thereby reducing the
heat absorbed) and thus would reduce the melting of the permafrost.
Well, bringing them back could possibly save the human race from
imminent death (touche).

So that is what happening in the woolly Mammoth project, from reading
DNA to rewriting it! The world we live in is going to be a very
different place in the next 50 or so years( maybe even less than that).
With all the stuff that is happening in the laboratories we might as
well live forever(imagine!).

Know more:

[Harvard team](https://www.theguardian.com/science/2017/feb/16/woolly-mammoth-resurrection-scientists)

[Woolly mammoths](https://amp.livescience.com/56678-woolly-mammoth-facts.html)

[Permafrost and its effects](https://amp.livescience.com/56678-woolly-mammoth-facts.html)

[Gene editing(CRISPR-Cas9)](https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/primer/genomicresearch/genomeediting)
