---
title: 'Is Art What Makes Us Human'
date: 2018-10-01
author: Ashley Roby
tags:
  - Blog
hero: ./images/pic1.png
slug: art-makes-us-human
excerpt:
---

Welcome to the 21st century where robots transplant organs, dating is
never offline, Internet Of Things and cognitive technologies are the new
norms, Babel fish-earbuds can get you the real-time translation of
literally any language(you didn't know this before, did you?)and you can
already receive your unborn child's genetic scorecard(hmm...interested?). The new addition to this list of
Technology That Will Transform Your World is nothing but the first
brushstroke on a canvas yet to be painted. Art by AI is still fresh in
the air.

Art, for many, makes life endurable. It seems as though AI too is now
facing stress issues(server breakup? maybe) these days and is now
turning to art for some relief. We may not believe it to be true but
that's what happens in the new technological era.

AI's baby steps in the artistic arena were neither aesthetically nor
conceptually rich enough to hold the attention of the art world for too
long.But we had underestimated its hidden prowess.Then came, Google's
pattern finding software named Deep Dream and this new model called GAN,
which got the heads turning.

Let's take a peek at what happens behind the screens. The GAN(Generated
Adversarial Network) works by pairing two AI neural networks. Firstly, a
generator which does the job that its name prescribes-generating images.
The discriminator, on the other hand, judges the painting based on its
previous built-in knowledge, learned by analyzing over 81,500 plus
paintings. simply put, the generator creating images and the
discriminator criticizing it, thus the engaging conversation leading to
a work of art.

However, AI had a notorious entry into the artistic arena. It started
out by first teaching itself to understand and mimic the human art. this
technique called Style Transfer, helped it to replicate, recreate and
blend different styles of artwork, later on..This was considered safe
enough by artists because AI hadn't threatened their job,yet.Style
transfer, these days, is being used in every possible domain from
photography to music composition. the process is easy, feed in whatever
that you want to replicate and the algorithm does the work as you sip
your coffee.

This intrusion of AI into our personal space can be quite unsettling and
debatable. Their entry calls for a radical shift in what we perceive as
art and that can never be easy!. If art was our way of expressing the
inexpressible how do we accept some algorithmic functions as "art"? Who
is the artist here? the programmer or the machine? From now are we going
to buy some random machine outputs to decorate our living room?(Oh my
good lord!can you imagine that?)Will this change our culture? Or is this
creating one of its own? Well, that would be food for thought.

However, AI advocates have more arguments than one to stop your
instincts to shun the technology away. Throughout the history, there
have been numerous art movements that captured the interest of the
people and could also well mirror the then society. Medieval art,
Renaissance art, Neoclassical art,,Romanticism are a few popular
milestones in the art history timeline. Now we live in the era of modern
art which has been quite well described by Jared Erickson, as Modern
Art=I Could Do That+Yeah, But You Didn't. (Couldn't agree more!)

These art movements basically call for the need to change our perception
of art with the ever-evolving world.AI is the biggest innovation of our
century and can probably exceed humans in every aspect by 2030, says
Elon Musk. So, the point is if computers are the new artists you better
buy their work and hang it wherever you want to.

As the greatest physicist of our times said, "Creativity is intelligence
having fun". If artificial intelligence is going to have some fun are
you sure you will enjoy the show?
