---
title: The Qubit - What, Why and How?
date: 2019-05-13
author: Hari Krishnan
tags:
  - Blog
hero:
slug: qubit-what-why-how
excerpt:
---
You might have heard of something called a quantum computer and how it
could be the future of computing, as it can potentially solve the
problems that were previously intractable on classical computers, that
is, the computers we use today.

But how are quantum computers able to solve problems that are
practically impossible on classical computers?

The answer to this lies in the basic unit of quantum information -- the
quantum bit or the qubit, which is the quantum analog to the binary bit
of classical information. Unlike the binary bit which consists of only
two possible states (0 and 1), the qubit states consist of 0, 1 and a
multitude of superposition (or linear combinations) of the 0 and 1
states. In quantum computation, we are interested in this purely quantum
mechanical behaviour and the state of superposition.

To be clear, measurement of the qubit will yield only 0 or 1, but when
it is in a state of superposition, we can only talk about the
probabilities of measurement, that is, how probable is the state of 0 or
1 upon measurement. To visualize the possible states of a qubit,
consider a sphere in 3 dimensions. The surface of this sphere can be
used to represent all the states of the qubit, including the 0 and 1
states. The "North pole" of this sphere represents the 0 state, while
the "South pole" represents the 1 state. These are the two points
accessible to a classical binary bit. However, all the other points on
the surface of this sphere are also possible states for the qubit. Thus,
we can see that the "state space" accessible to a qubit is much larger
than that of the binary bit!

![](media/image1.JPG){width="6.268055555555556in"
height="2.8645833333333335in"}

Why is this significant?

The state space of the qubit (or a system of qubits) is what allows it
to perform a large number of calculations at once, and gives it
tremendous potential to solve previously intractable problems. This is
done using the principle of superposition. But there's a catch. Among
these large number of different answers which are in a superposition, we
might want only one (the right answer!), but measurement could yield any
one of these answers at random. In order to get the right answer, we
need to get all the wrong answers to destructively interfere with each
other (where the property of superposition is once again used) so that
only the state corresponding to the right answer remains. This is one of
the key features of quantum computation and quantum algorithms are all
about taking advantage of them.

Few problems like finding the prime factors of any given composite odd
integer (which is crucial to modern-day cryptographic systems) are
almost exponentially faster on quantum computers (on paper at least)
than classical computers. To highlight this, it's practically impossible
for even the world's largest supercomputers to break a sufficiently
strong encryption as no efficient non-quantum algorithm for doing so has
been discovered so far. Therefore, the brute-force method of guessing
random keys and checking if they work is the only approach. This would
indeed take an extremely long time and consume a lot of energy for the
size of encryption keys that we use today. With quantum computers,
however, this becomes virtually trivial. Some other areas where quantum
computers can tremendously help are in drug research, molecular
modelling, better financial models and a whole class of optimization
problems that are employed in several disciplines.

How far are we in realizing true quantum computers?

Tech giants like Google, Intel, Microsoft, IBM (along with publicly
funded institutions) have already successfully made quantum computing
processors that consist of a few dozen qubits. But these are not nearly
enough to solve problems of practical relevance. These qubits also
require a high degree of maintenance, requiring them to be kept at
extremely low temperatures (colder than even the vacuum of deep space!)
so as to protect them from thermal excitation and other environmental
noise. This is important because the qubit's pure state of
superposition, which is an entirely quantum mechanical phenomenon, can
easily be destroyed by external noise (which can be anything from tiny
vibrations to stray electromagnetic fields). This destruction of the
pure state of the qubits is known as decoherence and it can happen all
too easily, thus rendering the qubits useless. Aside from the
technological and engineering challenge of fabricating and maintaining
qubits, there are other auxiliary questions that need to be answered and
are currently being explored. How do you input signals into a qubit? How
do you control the qubits so that they behave in the manner that you
want them to? How do you extract information out of a qubit? How do you
do all this without destroying the pure state of the qubits, and protect
them from environmental noise? How do you store quantum information? And
in the event of decoherence, how do you protect your information from
possible errors? These are just some of the many questions that
scientists, engineers and mathematicians working in this field are
thinking about. There is much progress to be made, but we have already
come a long way in the past two decades. So there's hope that one day we
may create a useful, fault-tolerant quantum computer, perhaps in the not
so distant future.

(This article was originally published on May 13, 2019 by Hari,
Anvesha.)
